# OBS-Scene-Optimization-Tips
**Things to consider for minimizing your OBS resource usage**

 I've been working on stream optimization & figured I'd share some tricks to reduce system resource consumption as much as possible. I use a single pc streaming setup & those 1% saves add up:

1. If you're not streaming at 60fps, don't run your apps at 60fps. Matching your output framerate across all your applications can have a huge impact on performance. Streamavatars, most games (& the ones that don't can be frame limited via your GPU software), & pretty much damn near anything lets you set a target FPS that the application will try to stay at. Obviously for more competitive games this might not be ideal, but if you're doing an art stream or a more chill type of game you've got nothing to lose.

2. If you have a graphics card installed, disable you iGPU via device manager. Modern CPUs include a built in GPU that is used in the event a system lacks a discrete GPU (the one that fits into the PCIE slot and is a huge brick). If you're using a discrete GPU with your iGPU still active, windows will allocate resources and power the iGPU as though it is being used when it is doing absolutely nothing. Disabling the iGPU will save you 50W+ of power, free up a few gbs of memory since windows wont automatically allocate it, and lessen the amount of heat your processor will spit out theoretically giving you more headroom before it starts to thermally throttle itself under load.

3. GROUP. YOUR. OBS. SOURCES! Depending on your setup, it's less demanding to apply a filter across a group than across multiple individual items. An example of this would be my stream labels for followers and such- instead of having them all doing their own thing with their own seperate filters, I grouped them in one folder and applied the same filters across the entire group. I went from 4x2 filters being used down to 1x2, and reduced my resource usage by about 6%!

4. INSPECT YOU FILTERS! A lot of us use shader filters, and while most are harmless a lot do this sneaky thing where the system demand increases/decreases dramatically with very small tweaks. Open up task manager and open up your performance metrics and start playing with filters, turning them off and on and tweaking their values to see this impact in real time. It takes a bit, but I reduced my resource load by 30% without impacting visual quality or design whatsoever- it was insane!

5. When using Browser sources, be mindful of interactions that result in large scale opacity changes when they go off (Emote droppers with a fade effect for example or even chat overlays if they're transparent & moving fast). The reason for this is that when they pop, you'll spike your processing load on your GPU while still doing everything you already had going on. If you like the massive bursts of colour and graphics when people raid or sub (like I do X3) you can still keep it, but budget in resource headroom to absorb the processing spike in anticipation of so as not to start dropping frames. A headroom of about 20-30% works well in my experience, but every system is different.

6. If you have an overlay element you like, try to do it with an image source instead of filters. A simple PNG or gif is much less resource intensive than stacking shaders to accomplish the same effect. In my case, I made a black circle with a drop shadow effect to serve as a backing for my album art widget instead of relying on filters- saved 2-3% on resources with zero visual impact.

7. ALWAYS SCENE/SOURCE MIRROR. It is less intensive for your system to render something once and copy that render across all the places you need it than it is to render it multiple times for each separate scene. Putting all of your twitch overlay stuff into one scene and then source/scene mirroring that collection across all your other scenes let's you use that initial processing hit to satisfy the needs of all. Additionally, try to stabilize the processing load across all of your scenes to avoid situations where you spike system demands when swapping between them.

8. Use Spout2 for your PNGTuber/Vtuber/Apps whenever and wherever possible. Spout2 allows your GPU to share what it has rendered between as many applications that need the data, and avoids situations where you ask it to render the same things multiple times. For example, if you're streaming and capturing your VTuber app without Spout2, what you are effectively doing is telling your GPU to render the vtubing app window along with it also being asked to render what you are then capturing in OBS. With Spout2, the GPU renders that same image once and simply shares it with both your vtubing app and OBS! 50% less rendering omgawd~

9. Give yourself resource headroom! If you are streaming and going over 80% resource usage just by virture of being live, when things start to happen and trigger simultaneously you'll run into issues where you consistently spike to 100% resource usage and risk dropping frames/stutter. Try to shoot to keep your passive setup around 60-70% resource usage to more effectively absorb those spikes when they come. As an example, it is always better to stream on Medium and be stable than it is to stream on High and stutter.

10. If possible, put your core stream apps and files on your C:/ drive as windows accesses that location the most quickly. ESPECIALLY do this if your C:/ drive has the fastest read/write on your setup! Your computer is rapidly reading/writing files when you're live to keep up with all the information you are asking it to process. Avoid having this take place on a traditional HDD if possible (~30mbs/s read/writes is the norm). Try to get an SSD on your system that can increase this to hundreds of mbs/s, or even better, use an NVMe drive that can reach as high as thousands of mbs/s. It makes a massive difference ❤️

11. Limit the number of different fonts you are asking OBS to load as much as possible. This is a small save, but it is easy to do and helps to unify your overlay design a bit more as well! If you are using a browser based overlays/sources, see if you can edit the .css settings they refer to and minimize the number of different fonts you use. Another thing you can do is edit the .css files to change hardcoded things like text colour instead of using OBS filters to change it to the colour you desire. Also try to set your font size to the exact size you need on your screen (scaling down from a larger font to get the perfect fit via OBS source transformation wastes performance).

12. If you are using many media sources infrequently in your scenes, be sure to hide them and right click>properties>close file when inactive. This is another small one but it can be a large save depending on your setup.

13. If you have static browser sources in your scenes that don't have animated/moving content, go to settings and set their FPS values to 1. I do this for things like PFPs of people I show on screen and other browser sources that are just there for decoration. Very small save admittedly, but it can add up depending on how many you use in your setup.

14. It's okay to scale sources up, but scaling them down if they're too large wastes performance. Make sure the native resolution of .jpeg/.png/movie/browser/etc. sources in OBS are the exact dimensions you plan to use them at.

Track your progress while you tweak by having Task Manager up and watching OBS's GPU%. Doing all of those things above let me go from using around 60%+ of my resources for my basic streaming setup (OBS/Vnyan/Firefox/Streamerbot/Stream Avatars/Discord/recording VOD while live at 2k60fps) with no game running, down to ~15% with massive improvements to stability and reduction to OBS load times. With my single PC I'm now using less power, producing less heat, have a stable/fast OBS environment, and have more processing headroom ^^!

I also dove into some encoder settings to see if I could lessen my GPU load even further, reduce the file size of my recordings, and take more advantage of my CPU while streaming! These settings moved 30-40% of the processing load for encoding off my GPU and on to my CPU which is ideal since my CPU was running at a passive 10% prior. Now, they run at parity with a 30% GPU load reduction while live.

To start READ THIS WEBPAGE:
https://ffmpeg.party/guides/x264/

1. First and foremost, set your encoder to x264. This uses your CPU for rendering/encoding your stream. If you have a beastly or half decent CPU it will have more than enough headroom to soak up the processing hit. Both Nvidia and AMD offer hardware-based encoders but chances are that you won't be wanting to sacrifice GPU performance while gaming to encode your stream. Do note however that NVidia's hardware encoder runs on a seperate chip on your GPU- using it should not affect overall graphical performance.

2. CRF is a rate control method that works by instead of setting a specific bitrate, you set a target quality level, and the encoder adjusts the bitrate accordingly. A lower CRF value indicates a higher quality but larger file size, while a higher CRF value results in lower quality but smaller file size. CRF is particularly useful when you prioritize maintaining consistent visual quality throughout the video rather than targeting a specific bitrate. It allows for efficient bitrate allocation, ensuring that more complex scenes receive higher bitrates while less complex scenes are allocated fewer bits. See attached photos for recommended settings based on your streaming resolution

3. The CPU Usage Preset should be set while looking at your performance metrics. Do note that task manager seems to lie about your GPU usage when actively streaming and will often report it as being in the 90%s while live (observe it's performance in your GPU driver software instead, it's almost certainly much lower). Hit the bandwidth test under settings > output, get your entire software setup running, and try to hit that middle ground between GPU/CPU demands by switching this setting!

4. When choosing which profile to use it is recommended to use a High profile. It allows for better video compression and quality during streaming. It is recommended for most modern streaming platforms as it enhances the viewing experience without significantly impacting performance.

5. The Tune option can be very powerful. As a streamer quality almost always comes first, but if you're on a tight resource budget you can use settings such as Fastdecode or Zerolatency to optimize your resource usage even further. see attached pic for an example of how each performs.

6. There's quite a bit that can be achieved if you're looking to dive even deeper into tweaks! I use the "keyint=600" and "aq-mode=2"  options because I stream at 60fps and want to normalize the quality of encoding a bit further (recommended to keep your keyint at 10x your target framerate).

7. If your CPU can budget for it, consider unticking " Enable Browser Source Hardware Acceleration" in Settings > Advanced. This setting uses your GPU to assist with rendering Browser sources and may not be a solution for everyone, but in my case with a strong CPU there is just no reason to have it running. I'd much rather have my CPU take a performance hit where I can afford it than my GPU where I cannot ^^!

8. Aim to keep your frame time at 16.67ms & lower (60fps streaming) or 33.34ms & lower (30fps streaming). You can monitor this by enabling the "Stats" dock in the OBS Docks. Frame timings relate to the frequency and consistency with which your PC renders what you transmit via OBS. If the frame time is too high, it can lead to latency issues and stutters for your viewers. Disabling GPU hardware acceleration in all apps you can (if your GPU is the bottleneck), or enabling hardware acceleration in all apps you can (if your CPU is the bottleneck) can help with this. Running less apps at once and optimizing your OBS sources also plays a factor. You can determing whether GPU or CPU optimization is the best route by monitoring your system resources through task manager and/or your native GPU software.

Watch those temps while balancing your processing load! If your CPU/GPU starts to run hot, dial things back.
